Draft of 21.0.0.6 GA blog post (#1474)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2021-06-11-request-timing-21006.adoc

Below is a sample output of the new request timing metrics:

[source, xml]
----
# TYPE vendor_requestTiming_activeRequestCount gauge
# HELP vendor_requestTiming_activeRequestCount The number of servlet requests currently running.
vendor_requestTiming_activeRequestCount 1

# TYPE vendor_requestTiming_requestCount_total counter
# HELP vendor_requestTiming_requestCount_total The number of servlet requests since the server started.
vendor_requestTiming_requestCount_total 3

# TYPE vendor_requestTiming_hungRequestCount gauge
# HELP vendor_requestTiming_hungRequestCount The number of servlet requests that are currently running but are hung.
vendor_requestTiming_hungRequestCount 0

# TYPE vendor_requestTiming_slowRequestCount gauge
# HELP vendor_requestTiming_slowRequestCount The number of servlet requests that are currently running but are slow.
vendor_requestTiming_slowRequestCount 0
----

To be able to retrieve request timing metrics from `/metrics` you will need to enable both the `requestTiming-1.0` feature in combination with one of the following MicroProfile Metric features: `mpMetrics-2.0`, `mpMetrics-2.2` or `mpMetrics-2.3` or `mpMetric-3.0`.

> To begin recieving metrics you will need to configure the request timing thresholds for slow or hung requests. The following example demonstrates enabling request timing metrics for `mpMetrics-3.0`, with a sample threshold configuration for both slow and hung servlet requests.

Reviewer: Change this sentence to:  "The metrics you receive depend on the configuration of the request timing thresholds for slow or hung requests."

Author: Done

+
By default, the Liberty HTTP channel configuration closes an incoming `HTTP keep alive connection` after 100 requests (`maxKeepAliveRequests`). The WAS Liberty performance documentation recommends disabling this without qualification and recommends using unlimited requests per persistent connection. Note that there is still the persistent timeout of 30 seconds (`persistTimeout`) which closes an idle `keepalive` socket after 30 seconds.
+
To fix this issue it was decided to change the default of the `maxKeepAliveRequests` option to `-1`. 

* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/16743[Pull in MyFaces 2.3.9]
+
The `jsf-2.3` feature in Open Liberty makes use of link:https://myfaces.apache.org/#/core23[Apache MyFaces] JavaServer Faces implementation. With the release of Apache MyFaces 2.3.9 a number of improvements and bug fixes have been made, for more information visit the link:https://issues.apache.org/jira/secure/ReleaseNote.jspa?projectId=10600&version=12349634[Apache MyFaces 2.3.9 changelog].

* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/15023[WASReqURLOidc cookie encodes the request url but doesn't decoded it upon successful redirection]
+

> When calling a protected `URL` including some query params, the server uses OIDC. The `URL` in the `WASReqURL` cookie was incorrectly encoded instead of the URL query params to be decoded upon successful redirection. To fix this issue instead of encoding the query string in the original request `URL`, we are leaving it as-is. That should ensure we ultimately use the `real` value of the query string. During the creation of the `WASReqURLOidc` cookie, the cookie value is encoded anyway to mitigate against malformed and potentially malicious cookie values. The `OidcRedirectServlet` code is also updated to use slightly different code to read the cookie so that the respective decoding is done.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When calling an OIDC-protected URL that includes query parameters, the URL in the `WASReqURLOidc` cookie was incorrectly encoded. This would cause the URL query parameters to not be decoded correctly upon successful redirection to the original request URL. To fix this issue, instead of encoding the query string in the original request URL, we are leaving it as-is. That should ensure we ultimately use the correct original value of the query string. During the creation of the `WASReqURLOidc` cookie, the cookie value is encoded to mitigate against malformed and potentially malicious cookie values anyway. The `OidcRedirectServlet` class is also updated to use slightly different code to read the cookie so that the appropriate respective decoding is done.
```

Author: Done

> link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/12778[mpJWT-1.1 configured by using jwksUri results in CWWKS5523E at the first jwt token presented to the server]

Reviewer 2: Need to add a `*` to make this the last bullet.

Author: Thank you! I've missed that!

+
The `JwkRetriever` class contained a bug that caused it to potentially return an incorrect JWK from an internal cache. The wrong key could be returned if a JWK document containing a single JWK was previously fetched and cached, followed by the Liberty server receiving a JWT with a `kid` value that didn’t match the cached JWK. Instead of attempting to re-fetch the JWK document to find a matching JWK, the Liberty runtime would return the cached JWK as the key to use to verify the JWT’s signature. That would cause a JWT signature verification error, which would fail the request.
The `JwkRetriever` class is now updated to return the sole cached JWK only if the JWT does not contain a key identifier (e.g. `kid`, `x5t`, or `use` values). If the JWT does contain one of those values, but a key cannot be found in the cache that matches one of those values, the runtime will now re-fetch the JWK document and see if it can find a matching key from there.

== Known issues

> 

Reviewer: * link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/17465[Remove system out] An extra message is output to the console during server startup.  It will only show when creating a certificate and on the first server start.  Subsequent ones will not see it.  
* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/17478[Invalid featureUtility help parameters shown] Invalid command line optional parameters (--featuresBom) and (--to) are shown with "featureUtility help installFeature". Invalid command line optional parameter (--featuresBom) is shown with "featureUtility help installServerFeatures"

Author: I also added a small amount of text below the title to give a slight explanation. Please review and let me know if you prefer to remove overall or change it. 

Texted added into the section:
"In this release there is a couple of issues that have already been detected. If you would like to find out more you can check out the corresponding Github Issues linked bellow."

----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.openliberty</groupId>
    <artifactId>openliberty-runtime</artifactId>
    <version>21.0.0.6</version>
    <type>zip</type>
</dependency>
----

Or for link:{url-prefix}/guides/gradle-intro.html[Gradle]:

[source,gradle]
----
dependencies {
    libertyRuntime group: 'io.openliberty', name: 'openliberty-runtime', version: '[21.0.0.6,)'
}
----

Or if you're using Docker:

[source]
----
FROM open-liberty
----
//end::run[]

// // // // // // // //
// Above:
// Replace the RELEASE_VERSION with the Open Liberty release number e.g. 20.0.0.4
// // // // // // // //

Or take a look at our link:{url-prefix}/downloads/[Downloads page].

[link=https://stackoverflow.com/tags/open-liberty]
image::img/blog/blog_btn_stack.svg[Ask a question on Stack Overflow, align="center"]

//tag::features[]

[#metrics]
=== Request Timing now supported by MicroProfile Metrics

The request timing feature (`requestTiming-1.0`) is used to keep track of the slow and hung requests for servlet requests with a RequestTimingStats MXBean. The Microprofile Metrics features (`mpMetrics-X.X`) on the other hand provides vendor metrics that are distinct to the Open Liberty runtime.

> Starting with the Open Liberty 21.0.0.6 the RequestTimingStats MXBean will now have it’s data retrieved by the MicroProfile Metrics feature for reporting on the `/metrics` (or `/metrics/vendor`) endpoint. This functionality is compatible with both the 2.X and 3.X MicroProfile Metrics features.

Reviewer: it's. should be its

Author: Done

The problem was that the `useJandex` setting was attached to a data structure that Open Liberty uses to access unexpanded application files. Open Liberty uses a different data structure to access the expanded application files.  The `useJandex` setting was not attached to the second data structure.
The problem was fixed by adding steps to transfer the `useJandex` setting to the data structure used by Open Liberty to access the expanded application files.

* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/17203[ORB.init() called simultaneously on two threads during server start]
+
We found that Java’s `AtomicReference.getAndUpdate()` did not prevent the initialization code from running twice.
(This is the design of AtomicReference but a false assumption about this led to a bug in Liberty.)

> To avoid this we wrote our own concurrent utility, AcidReference, that guaranteed a single thread would win the race to perform the initialization.

Reviewer: comma after "To avoid this"

Author: Done

The `JwkRetriever` class was updated to return the sole cached JWK only if the JWT does not contain a key identifier (e.g. `kid`, `x5t`, or `use` values). If the JWT does contain one of those values, but a key cannot be found in the cache that matches one of those values, the runtime will re-fetch the JWK document and see if it can find a matching key from within the document.

== Known issues

In this release, a couple of issues were discovered. If you would like to find out more, you can check out the corresponding Github Issues linked bellow.

* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/17465[Remove system out]
+

> An extra message is output to the console during server startup. It will only show when creating a certificate and on the first server start. Subsequent ones will not see it.

Reviewer: Change "Subsequent ones" to "Subsequent server starts"

Author: Done

* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/17203[ORB.init() called simultaneously on two threads during server start]
+

> We found a problem in Liberty's ORB initialization code, based on a false assumuption that Java's `AtomicReference.getAndUpdate()` would only call the provided 'updateFunction' once for any update to the reference's value. (In fact, though it guarantees the update to the reference's value to be atomic, the `updateFunction` might be called by several threads contending to perform the update). To provide the behaviour we required, we devised our own concurrent utility, AcidReference, (built using AtomicReference), which guarantees the `updateFunction` is only called once, by one of the threads contending for update. Making use of this new `AcidReference` allows any contention in ORB initialization in Liberty to be resolved correctly, tasking one thread to perform the ORB initialization whilst any others wait for its result.

Reviewer 3: Suggested edit:

We found a problem in the Liberty ORB initialization code, based on a false assumuption that the Java `AtomicReference.getAndUpdate()` would only call the provided 'updateFunction' once for any update to the reference value. In fact, though it guarantees the update to the reference's value to be atomic, the `updateFunction` might be called by several threads contending to perform the update. To provide the behavior we required, we devised our own concurrent utility, AcidReference, which was built by using AtomicReference and  guarantees the `updateFunction` is only called once, by one of the threads contending for update. Making use of this new `AcidReference` allows any contention in ORB initialization in Liberty to be resolved correctly, tasking one thread to perform the ORB initialization while any others wait for its result.
